# RESULTS

[figure-compare] shows the annually resolved temperature change
computed by ZONTEM, and, for comparison, the GISTEMP series using
only meteorological stations [HANSENLEBEDEFF1987] (the data used
are actually generated by ccc-gistemp [BARNESJONES2011], but the
method and results are identical).

[table-compare] shows the trend obtained by fitting a linear
model to the most recent 30 years. The GISTEMP and ZONTEM
series have the same trend (difference in trends are far smaller
than differences explained by noise).
The errors in estimating the trend are more likely than
not smaller for GISTEMP. This is to be expected from its more
sophisticated treatment of what is essentially the same input
data. In estimating errors, no attempt was made to account for
autocorrelation even though an estimate of the autocorrelation
structure marginally suggests that an AR(1) model might be
appropriate. The effect of this would be to reduce the degrees of
freedom, and hence increase the estimated errors in trend.  Since this
is no more than a sketch, I have chosen the simpler model, but
with the caveat that the errors are more likely than not
underestimated. I encourage curious modellers to torture the
data with increasingly elaborate models.

At the time of preparing this report, ZONTEM has 1998 as the
warmest year (highest anomaly). Record years are not particular
stable features of annually resolved analyses of global
temperature change. Minor changes to methods, the receipt of
delayed data for a meteorological station, or improved metadata,
are among the kinds of changes that can shift a particular
year's anomaly value by a few hundredths of a Kelvin which could
be enough to move it up or down the ranking.
For example, CRUTEM3 [BROHANETAL2006] also has 1998 as the
warmest year, but CRUTEM4 [JONESETAL2010] does not.

:todo:drj: much of what follows is discussion not results.

Of the commonly available instrumental estimates of temperature change,
the GISTEMP meteorological station analysis is the most appropriate for
comparison for several reasons: no ocean data, zonal scheme, reference
station method. Ocean data improves coverage, but comes with
data homogenisation issues of their own [HANSENETAL1996].
For simplicity's sake ZONTEM uses only
metereological station data; a comparison with a dataset that
combines metereological station data with ocean data wouldn't be
a meaningful comparison in this context.

The zonal scheme used by GISTEMP [HANSENETAL2006] is similar to
the zonal scheme used by ZONTEM. In GISTEMP hemispheric and
global averages are computed from zonal averages weighted by the
area of the zone, which avoids giving too much weight to zones
that are well-endowed with stations. Mitchell, 1963, discusses a
similar approach, but other analyses of global temperature
change do not generally incorporate this zonal idea. I encourage
the curious to produce their own comparisons of ZONTEM and other
analyses of global temperature change.

ZONTEM uses the Reference Station
Method [HANSENLEBEDEFF1987] to combine data from several
metereological stations. I expect the method used to combine stations
to only make a small difference to global trends [VOSEETAL2005],
and again I encourage the curious to modify ZONTEM to use a
different method of combining stations.
